

Books
All Products
Go

Explore this book

customer reviews

rate this item

See more by this author

all books by Ray Coleman

Customers also bought

these books

these other items

Share your thoughts

write a review

e-mail a friend about this item

Add to Shopping Cart

(Use if you're redeeming a promotional certificate or coupon.)

Returning customer?

Sign in to turn on 1-Click ordering.

(We'll set one up for you)

View my Wish List

Clapton! : An Authorized Biography

by Ray Coleman

List Price: $14.95

Our Price: $11.96

You Save: $2.99 (20%)

Used Price: $9.57

Availability: Usually ships within 24 hours.

See larger photo

Paperback Reissue edition (October 1988)

Warner Books; ISBN: 0446386308 ; Dimensions (in inches): 0.99 x 8.03 x 5.28

Amazon.com Sales Rank: 97,543

Average Customer Rating: Based on 5 reviews. Write a review.

Rate this item to get personal recommendations.

Customers who bought this book also bought:

Clapton : Edge of Darkness by Christopher Sandford

Eric Clapton : In His Own Words by Eric Clapton, et al -- available used

E.C. Was Here by Eric Clapton

Midnight Riders : The Story of the Allman Brothers Band by Scott Freeman -- available used

Explore similar items

All Customer Reviews

Avg. Customer Rating:

Write an online review and share your thoughts with other customers!

3 of 4 people found the following review helpful:

Hagiography Taken to Extremes, October 27, 2000

Reviewer: A reader from London, UK

If you are a Clapton fan and need 300 pages of reassurance that he is a a gifted musician, then put this book at the top of your shopping list. If, however, you are looking for an objective assessment of his life, career and impact as a musician you'll need to look elsewhere.

Clapton and Coleman were close friends and this book is essentially a 300-page french kiss, as most third-party "authorized biographies" are. It's hard to imagine a book with more postive editorializing adjectives per page (briliant, superb, amazing, stunning.)

Clapton's failed marriages are glossed over in a paragraph or so and his heroin addiction is treated like a valiant and ultimately positive "adventure." The author throws out all prentense of neutrality by the end of the first chapter.

Coleman is capable of superb work, as his definitive biography of John Lennon shows. One can only hope that someday someone will do a similar treatment of Clapton's life. This isn't it by a long stretch.

If you are in the market for a first-rate biography of a great guitarist, consider Jimi Hendrix: Electric Gypsy.

Was this review helpful to you?

5 of 5 people found the following review helpful:

one great book, November 1, 1999

Reviewer: Sonia from Northern Idaho

This book has it all from pictures to journal writings. This book tells about EC's struggles as a young boy in art school to his marriage and even about his drug habits. This book is number one in my book and always will. It is a must read.

Was this review helpful to you?

The definitive biography of EC as a man., October 7, 1999

Reviewer: Virginia Lohle from New York City

Ray Coleman was granted amazing access to Eric, his family and friends. This is the best book on the market about Eric as a person. Roberty's books are more comprehensive about his music, but the late, great Melody Maker editor Ray Coleman knew and loved Eric for many years, and has rare insight.

Was this review helpful to you?

2 of 2 people found the following review helpful:

As Good As It Gets-- This book is a Bible of this God's life, November 5, 1998

Reviewer: debslogan@email.msn.com from U.S.A.

This book will truly make any reader a devoted fan to the Rock world's answer to the Guitar Master. His life was more complex than the Blues stars he tried to imitate. From love triangles,addictions,career struggles,freindships and loyalties, Eric has gone through it all, and now he has finally been rewarded. After reading this book, you'll feel you've known him and want to know more!!!!!

Was this review helpful to you?

See all 5 customer reviews...
Customers who bought titles by Ray Coleman also bought titles by these authors:

John Lennon
Percy 'thrills Thrillington
Eric Clapton
Robert Rosen
Geoffrey Giuliano

Explore similar authors

Auctions and zShops sellers and our other stores recommend:

ERIC CLAPTON 12x18 LAMINATE 1988 BLACK AND WHITE ARTIST SKETCH Eric and Guitar (Current bid: $10.00)
ERIC CLAPTON ~ by Marc Roberty ~ (Price: $7.95)

Listmania!

The Best CD's of 2001: A list by jonnylangnews, Music Fan
The Most Requested Music on the Radio: A list by Michael Barbieri, National Radio Programmer
GUITAR !!!!!!: A list by Todd Tamanend Clark, Poet/Composer/Guitarist

Look for similar books by subject:

Browse for books in:

Subjects > Biographies & Memoirs > General

Subjects > Entertainment > Music > Musical Genres > Rock

Search for books by subject:

Clapton, Eric

Rock musicians

Biography

Rock music

Biography / Autobiography

Music

Rock

Find books matching ALL checked subjects

i.e., each book must be in subject 1 AND subject 2 AND ...

I have read this book, and I want to review it.
Correct errors and omissions in this listing.

Search
Books
All Products
for Go

Text Only

Top of Page

Book Search | Browse Subjects | Bestsellers | New and Future Releases | Bargain Book Outlet

e-Books | Rare and Used

Amazon.com Home | Directory of All Stores

Our International Sites: United Kingdom | Germany | Japan | France

Help | Shopping Cart | Your Account | Sell Items | 1-Click Settings

About Amazon.com | Join Our Staff

Conditions of Use | Privacy Notice © 1996-2001, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates

